{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1138\cocoasubrtf470
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww14200\viewh16600\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 Arden Visitor - President for Wemindji CTA\
\
Role and responsibilities\

\b0 As an organization the most important role is to protect and preserve the traditional way of life, the hunting trapping, and fishing\
Ensure the board mandates are undertaken in collaboration with the executive director.\
The president election is every four years. I was elected in 2008.\
We are seven members of the CTA board.\
\
I work with Angus.\
\

\b What have been he major challenges?\

\b0 The funding that we get form the Cree Nation of Wemindji. There was a cut in funding from the band council. There was a 30% cut. It is because of the deficit that the CTA had in the past, the band council decided to pay the deficit and reduce 30% funding.\
\
It was only a 2011 reduction in funding of 30%. Funding will return to normal in 2012.\
\

\b Why was there a deficit?\

\b0 There was flood damage in the building which resulted in repairs having to be done. We do not know if the CTA had insurance at that time to cover the damage. $100,000 is the estimated deficit.\
\
There is another source of funding that went down. The James Bay/ Eyou funding as a result from the economic crash in 2008, it affected the funding. Ope (find the fund name). This fund has been reduced by 20 to 30% and is determined by investments that other people make with the agreement money.\
\
It funds the CTA on an annual basis.\

\b \
Money
\b0 \
The revenue that comes from Niskamoon is only for the projects
\b . 
\b0 The money from Wemindji is for administration and logistics.\
Wemindji does the funding and accounting for the CTA.\

\b \
Niskamoon funding
\b0 \
If the funding is cut, we will be able to carry out less projects, the activities and the organization will not stop, we will continue to work with what we have.\
\
You have to submit a project before you get the funding. It is not a set amount that is received.\
The funding that is investment based, is an annual fund.\
\
A complete stop of Niskamoon funding would be a bad thing.\
We charge a small administration fee to carry out projects on behalf of the projects. We charge niskamoon a percentage administration fee, and that depends on the amount of projects that are conducted by the tallyman and Cree Nation.\
\
This year, we will have to reduce the length of time and fishing activity when the funding from Niksamoon is reduced.\
\
The Board has the responsibility to ensure that the funding is not cut. \
\
The administration funding from the band council goes towards the hiring of people and administrative fees.\
Angus was told that  there is less funds available, so less fishing camps, and activities will have to take place.\
\

\b\fs32 Fire
\b0 \
During the day of the fire, the VP for the CTA board went over to Arden's house and brought up the idea of hiring two groups of three people to set fish nets and feed the community and elders as people can only get limited supplies from the store.
\fs24 \

\b \
Is the importance of traditional hunting and fishing justified by such emergencies?
\b0 \
It is justified, because people will see it in the end and everything is transparent. People will be able to see where the money has gone and how it has benefited the community.\
\
\

\b Fishing program\

\b0 There is no guarantee of funding for the tallyman. \
At the Niskamoon level might be depleted, but I am not sure.\
The fisheries is important for the community of Wemindji. We employ people through the fisheries program across 4 to 5 camps. And we employ about 4 people per camp.\
\
The elders like eating the fish and is a healthy diet, and everyone in general enjoys fish.\
\
I do not know if there is less fishing activity, I think it has always been the same. The methods have changed, more people now go out with their fishing rods. I do not know if there are fewer fish. I do now know if the fish are gotten smaller.\
\
People still go out fining on their own without being employed by the CTA.\
\
I can not say that there are fewer fish since my father-in-law set his net two days ago, the first day he caught 70 fish, and the second day he caught 50 fish. It all depends on the fisherman. <IT APPEARS TO BE A RELATIVE METRIC?>\
\
Angus claims that he has 20 secret fishing spots (JOKE)\
\
\

\b Do you go out fishing? What methods do you employ?\

\b0 I use a rod and gill net. and I prefer both.\
I like all types of fish.\
I was very young when i started fishing, even if you do not fish, you still bring the children along. My parents taught me how to fish and used to go out with family members.\
I fish in the Moar Bay area. Moar Bay is from my mother's side. We used to go out every spring/summer.\

\b \
Walleye Derby
\b0 \
I think the Walleye derby is a good thing and is a good way of getting people involved.\
One good thing about the derby is that it is a family oriented event and it gets families out and is not always about competition. It is about getting together.\

\b \
Youth and a growing population\

\b0 I don't think there are fewer youth that are interested. But it also depends on which family. Some families do not do any fusing or hunting. Some other families do go out.\
\
It is hard to say if there are fewer people and if they are being distracted by technologies and media.\
\
I went out in a boat ride with my two boys, wife, sister-in-law, nephew. We went out to of see a family. While we were out in the water, there was a fog that came in. On our way back, we almost got lost.\
\
My nephew (13-14 years old ). takes out his phone, and take out the GPS/maps application and guided the boat and family back to Wemindji. Some of them use it to their advantage.\
\
I do not think that technology can be used to exploit fish as the fish nets are set on family traplines and fish net locations.\
\

\b Development through mining  and others\

\b0 I think it is good in a away as it provides jobs and income so they can support their families. At the same time, they can go out and be out on the land. The two weeks on two weeks off will allow them to balance that lifestyle and it is beneficial to the community.\
\
In terms of the land, there is a specific responsible way that you can do development on our territory. You need to take into account the damage on the territory.\
People have different areas, traplines, locations of interest for fishing, graveyards, first moose location, etc.  The way it could be done is development is to take place on the trapline, it needs to be understood how the development will affect that trapline. It remains with the family to make that decision if they will give up that lake/river or area of interest.\
\
It is important for the developer to sit down with the family that is being affected and for them to explain what and how the impact will affect the family and trapline. It is also important for the families/tallyman to have the final say.\
\
An agreement needs to be made in order to ensure that the benefits from the project return to the families and the community.\
Wemindji is stronger in the face of development as a community than individual families.\

\b \
Suggested improvements
\b0 \
"We live in the real world"\
I would like to ensure that the funding is steady and we can carry out the projects on a regular basis in order to help the trappers. Every year/month/week a trapper comes into the CTA office asking for assistance in a project.\
\
Jennifer Morission (finanaicla controller) is responsible for the CTA finances.\
}