{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1138\cocoasubrtf510
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww14200\viewh16600\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 I retired from the fishing program. Early retirement.\
\
The last year that I went fishing as part of the program was in 2008. The program ran for 4 weeks.\
The first thing we do is make camp.\
We built our own nets.\
We use teepees.\
Everything is kept at the camp. Minimum transportation\
\
We fish for whitefish, cisco, and trout. All the three fish are my favourite, when they are big.\
Smoked fish is the preferred method for eating.\
\
I was in my 20s when I started fishing. I am now 40. I work everyday, and I am active everyday. \
\

\b Youth\

\b0 Every year different people are involved with the fishing program. The children generally prefer fishing rods.\
\

\b Rod vs net\

\b0 The fishing rods are easier to use and require less work compared to deploying a gill net, cleaning, and checking the net.\
When the weather is difficult, it becomes difficult to check the net. When someone is checking the net, another person needs to steer and stabilize the boat.\

\b \
Methods
\b0 \
We set multiple nets in different areas for each camp.\
We measure the fish at the camp, and then the women clean them.\
Our hands are cold and we need to get them into the teepee right away.\
\
We measure the fish because they are told to. And we are told that we should not take fish smaller than 12" (but a gill net will kill the fish?!).\
Martin Lessard informs the fisherman. The meeting would take place at the CTA office.\
Martin never visited Leonard's fishing camp. He would not have mind if they came or not, but it would be nice if Martin would come and see his camp.\
\
They were told to use 3" (and larger) sized gill nets for fishing activities.\
\
I know that the fish mature in August and that is when the are harvested. The data is irrelevant.\
We realize (Cree) that whatever we are harvesting, we will get larger and smaller than expected. We have to accept that.\
\
Everyone loves going out fishing and we fish all year round. I enjoy the fishing more than the monitoring. And I enjoy being out at my fishing camp.\
\

\b Changes and recommendations\

\b0 The length of time of the program is too short. The program used to be longer in duration.\
I do not care about the program anymore.\
\
The program should run when the fish are in season as it will increase the enjoyment of the fishing activity as we know the fish will be better in quality.\

\b \
Reduced fish number
\b0 \
I think that there are less fish and fisherman out in the bay.\
Sometimes I do not catch any fish.\

\b \
End of the program consequences\

\b0 For myself I would mind, I am concerned about the other fisherman that depend on the income from the program.\
I am a tallyman, I have other sources of income and income security program through the CTA.\
\
Good luck to all the fisherman!
\b \
}