{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1138\cocoasubrtf510
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww14200\viewh16600\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural

\f0\b\fs24 \cf0 How long have you been fishing and what other actives do you do?\

\b0 I used to work full time back in 1978. I got older and started hunting on weekends. I have been wiring steadily since 2005. I decided to retire and spend more time in the bush. My trapline is VC 23, that is where I go in the wintertime. During the sumer time, I am in Moar Bay as that is my wife's trapline and I need to spend time there.\
\
You can call me a full-time hunter, I like hunting and trapping, and I like setting fishnets and fishing.\
\
During wintertime at my camp, I also put nets in the ice for ice fishing. I do all forms of hunting, trapping, and fishing. I like all of them and I try to put them all together.\
\
Everything is good in taste, You cook it differently. A beaver can be cooked multiples ways. The young generation, when we remove the fat layer, we put some meat on there and we call it a kite (?). We boil the beaver meat.\

\b \
Atlantic brants
\b0 \
The brants, there are a lot of them. They come in spring, but no one is shooting them because they say that they taste different. They are also there in the fall and that is when we used to shoot them. In the fall they taste different after they eat the eel grass.\
\
One spring, the brants tasted like geese. We were told that they were contaminated from the oil spill down south where they migrate and they could spend their summer where they used to and they had to scare them off to where the geese feed. And when they came up north during the spring time, they almost tasted like geese and they were really really good. We used to kill lots of brants in the fall. Now, there are lots of brants, but no one is shooting them.\
\
Leonard said he shot a brant in fall 2011 just to try it again, but he said it was no good.\
\
If the skin is whitish, it should be good, but if the skin is orange in colour, they are not very good. They come in bunches in the spring.\
\

\b Moar Bay fishing activity\

\b0 There are lots of fish. I believe there are lots of fish.\
Sometimes when you put the net, seals come around and they pick out the fish, that is when we catch less fish. Beluga whales also eats the fish and scares off the fish. So the seals and the belugas scare off the fish to deeper waters.\

\b\fs32 \
They say when a whale comes around, sometimes it scares the fish and scatters them to the nets.
\fs24 \
\

\b0 I say there are a lot of fish, this time in August/September, we try to use a 3 to 4" gill net and the cisco go through the nets. When we use the 3" we tend to cath more cisco.\
\
During the fall, I use a 2.5" and I catch the small cisco.\
And the same in the late spring, I use a 2.5" to catch small cisco to try something different.\
\
In the winter time I use 5.5" for pike, I never go for whitefish. But I try a 4" for suckers.\
\

\b Children\

\b0 I have four kids, they sometimes  come out with me hunting and fishing. My eldest son (19 years old) really likes it. I started hunting at the age of 16-17, i did not start really early. But most of the people they take their kids when the are 6-7 and they use firearms and it is really dangerous.\
\
I take my kids out in the summer time, and my youngest one is 15. \

\b \
Youth in the community\

\b0 It is not that the children are not interested, it is the parents that have lost their traditional ways, a lot of these families do not have trap lies like we do, they have to go out with their friends and that is when they start losing interest in hunting. It is starting to happen in Chissasibi, and there are not a lot of people that are going out goose hunting. \
\
My grandparents told me that in the future, there will be no more elders. I guess it is now starting to show. Back then, I did not know when they meant, and I was scared, and now I can see it happen. Now the population is young and growing and our elders are fewer and fewer.\
\
There was a video in 1972, The Cree People of Paint Hills, there was a secene of a feat and you could only see elders during that time, and now there are just a few.\

\b \
Traplines and familes
\b0 \
Back then,we had tallyman, and they started off in Old Factory. The chiefs who were in charge started giving out territories and they were passed on. Some people had small areas, and other had larger areas.\
\
I had an idea of splitting the larger traplines and allocate them to those that do not have traplines. The challenge with the larger trap lines is that the families and tallyman only hunt on a small area and do not use the entire trapline.\
\
I do not now why some families do not have traplines. I assume it has something to do with a groaning new population.\
After marrying my wife, I had access to her trapline and I wanted my wife to be happy and spend time with her side of the family instead of just taking her from her family and putting her on my trapline. And the Moar Bay area is really nice and I like that area. VC 12 (wife side of the trapline).\

\b \
Future Development
\b0 \
I do not think development will be problem. Before we had the road, planes were really expensive, and now we have the road and it allow more access. So roads with development will allow people to access larger areas of the land. Income security is a big concern today. Our generation is paid to go hunting, but we do not know how long that will continue. It might just stop one day.\
\
For me, I am glad that Hydro-Quebec came along and the benefits that it brought, jobs. If they did not come along, we might be like towns across the James Bay like Attawapiskat. The government would not take care of us. I am really glad that Hydro came along.\
\
Future projects similar to the hydro development, that benefit the community, would be a good thing for the current and future generation (speaking to employment and income security).\
\
If there were no jobs, there would be a lot more hunting. Now that there are jobs, there are less people hunting. So it balances it out. If we were not working, we would be out killing a lot more animals. So it balances itself out. I think it is good that people are working.\
\
The idea of a weekend hunter is kinda a good balance. A lot of these guys like hunting in spring. They like hunting and they go back to work.\

\b \
Fisheries Monitoring program
\b0 \
I started three years ago (2009). I provide a boat. I like working and I have to work. The fisheries is part of my life and I have spent a lot of time in the bush. If you work you get paid, I do not want to slack off. I take care of the paperwork since my brother in-laws are not experienced with numbers, so I try to provide that service. I speak english quite a bit, all those things were they place the purchase orders.\

\b \
Administration of fisheries program
\b0 \
I think the program s a good thing as it allows us to practice a traditional lifestyle. If the program is cut, it will not be a bad thing for me, since i hunt all winter (from october to the end of june) and in the summer a find seasonal employment. I plan and prepare what I do.\
\
Fisheries is a good thing and I learned a lot of what I did not know. My wife's sister is a good teacher and I try to learn from there. Most of the fisheries knowledge I gained from my wife's side of the family since my father also used to work and spend time in Moose Factory, Cape Jones, and chissasibi. We did not spend much time in the bush. But when I got married, I started spending time with my wife's family and I learned a lot from there. Especially fishing.\
\
The CTA never gave me training for fishing, but only on the paperwork. They do not provide training on how to put out the fish nets.\
Martin did come to the Moar Bay fishing camp.\

\b \
Program improvements
\b0 \
They have these other slashing programs and contracts. They usually give out cheques. When Edward worked at the CTA, and when I started doing contacts in 2005. When you buy groceries, you can always leave some of the groceries for your family.  The same applied for gasoline. Now with purchase orders, you can not do that anymore. \
\
Some of these guys that drink, when they get the cheques they tend to go to Radisson and use the meal money for drinks. That is when the CTA stopped the cheques and started using purchase orders.\
\
The purchase orders are left the community store and you deduct your purchases from there. The cheques used to be more convenient as your could cash your cheque.\
\
We keep all the receipts. If the money was issued in the form of a cheque we could cash it and keep cash on hand rather than rely on.\

\b \
\
General comments
\b0 \
We try to bring out fish in town every second day when they are still fresh. As a result we burn a lot of gas. The program is running smooth. \
\
When the fish is caught, I call in the driver and I try to meet them at the river bank so I can give them the fish there. And usually they go around right away house to house while they are still fresh. Before we used to go to the minimall and put them there and people would come and take what they need.\
\
The CTA deep freezers are not really used since the fish are no longer that fresh.\
\
\

\b Challenges
\b0 \
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural
\cf0 There is some stuff that I do not have to mention.\
The challenges are in our group but does not have anything to do with the CTA.\
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural
\cf0 \
There are slackers that are not really helping out, there are a few people that are working, and the others are slackers who do not work. I do not want to spread it out.\
\
\

\b Monitoring aspect\

\b0 I do not mind doing it. It is part of the enjoyment of the fishing and it feels like going back to school. The one thing that I did not do/like is the GPS of the area. One guy was saying that others might come around and put their nets in the area.\
We were told to use a GPS to mark the nets as part of the program. This was part of the kits prepared by Martin Lessard and the CTA.\
\

\b Digital tools and CyberTracker\

\b0 I would not want to use the digital tool, I am not too sure.\
"I think it is weird" if I had to use CyberTracker to record each fish that was landed as part of the program.\
\
I do not want to have to record "it is kind of awkward". Are they thinking/talking about that?\
\

\b \
Geese
\b0 \
It will be very soon that there will be no geese that will be coming along the coast. I think the fall is worse for geese, but there are also ducks at that time. I enjoy life that way.\

\b \
Tourism\

\b0 "Tourists, in category land 3, the white people they do what they want. I could say "us", we sorta gave away that land. They can do what they want. This is category land 1, Here they can not do anything" The tallyman can not do anything as they are covered by the law.\
\
Out in the bay, they can not build cabins, as the tallyman are pretty strict out on the coast.\
\
The best time for tourists to come out would be in the summer for sightseeing. That is what I think.}