{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\cocoartf1138\cocoasubrtf510
{\fonttbl\f0\fswiss\fcharset0 Helvetica;}
{\colortbl;\red255\green255\blue255;}
\margl1440\margr1440\vieww14200\viewh16600\viewkind0
\pard\tx566\tx1133\tx1700\tx2267\tx2834\tx3401\tx3968\tx4535\tx5102\tx5669\tx6236\tx6803\pardirnatural

\f0\fs24 \cf0 Listening to Robert Visitor on the Wemindji Radio\

\b \
Sources of food coming from the community store and now that the store is burnt, what are their concerns?\

\b0 They mentioned something about 25lbs flour bags.\
\
There is an active discussion taking place in Cree while the women knit.\
\
They discussed interesting recipes used with fish and how stretched things used to be in the past.\

\b \
Are they concerned with the smoke damage in the community store and that no one else is out fishing at the moment apart from Irene and Sinclair?\

\b0 There has to be an emergency meeting with the Chief and Council (deputy chief at the moment since Rodney is out of town). There is nothing much that people can do for food apart from going out of town for their food or emptying their freezers.\
\
They did not think about this happening when they closed down the Northern store. And our population is growing and we only have one store. But it does not matter how many stores we have, the population is outgrowing. People would like going to more than one store. And now since the Northern has been closed, people are going out of down and down south to buy new groceries.\
\

\b\fs32 One women posted on Facebook asking the question "where am I going to get my milk for my baby?"\

\b0\fs24 \
My grand-daughter is 10 months old. The Northern used to carry the baby formula that she drinks. I asked the community store to order the formula to order that since the Fall of 2011. It is really expensive here, but it is expensive here.\

\b \
Other concerns\

\b0 There are a lot of things like milk, eggs, bread that are not available after the fire.\

\b \
What would you have done 50 years ago?\

\b0 They were prepared when they went in the bush. They took flour, sugar, and tea (a lot of tea). But when we were in town, we would get what we needed from in town. But back then we did not have a lot of money.\
\
Today the traditional way of life is not regularly practiced. People have jobs and they have to stay in town. So the grocery store is needed.\
\
Not everyone has a canoe to go fishing and hunting. And not everyone has a car to go down south or to another community to get the food that they need.\
\
And the people that do go out on the land they share it with the people that do not go out in the bush.\

\b \
Or access to a helicopter (as a joke)\
\

\b0 Back then, people used to share their food from the bush, but now, people do not do that as much as before.\
\
I find that people are not as close today as they were back then.\
I could be walking with two heavy grocery bags, and no one will stop to help me. They will just pass me by and I would have to carry them all the way home.\
\
"It seems that we depend on electricity and water. That blackout that we had last fall was a disaster for everyone. A rude awakening. They did not realize how much they depended on electrify and water. They are all spoiled".\
\
We used to be a much closer knit community before we had all these things. Now everyone is very divided in the community.\
\
The more development that occurs in the community, the larger the divide grows in the community.\
People used to visit other families on Sunday. We do not do that anymore. We used to sit around and tell stories, it seems like such a long time ago. People do not do that anymore. There are a lot of things that were done back then that are not done anymore. And it is sad.\
\
We rely on new technologies like power, water, and vehicles. We do not think about each other.\
People left down during the blackout, because they wanted to be somewhere with power. They left instead of helping people in their own community. It was like every man for himself.\

\b \
Concern for the new generation of Cree\

\b0 Yes I am. Racism. I don't like that. Young people should not even know about that. People my age and younger are racist. We are all suppose to love one another, we are all suppose to live together in harmony.\
\
There are a lot of things that they are not teaching the young people. Some of them are lazy and the do not want to work. And the are our future leaders who are going to run the community. I hate to think about what is going to happen in the next 20 years. Someone who is wearing their pants halfway down their bum. \

\b \
Youth solutions and education
\b0 \
They should concentrate how to treat people, respect others, and provide them  well rounded education so they can come back and do something for their community. I am scared sometimes for future leaders, and what our community will be like in the future.\
\
There are a lot of young people when you ask them to do simple chores, and they will not do it. But they have to have the later gadgets and will play till the late hours of the night. They do not want to do anything. It is really hard to get them to do anything.\
\
I had to look after my siblings back when I was young.\
\
"When you try to tell then that I used to do that, they respond by saying that this is 2012."\

\b \
Future development\

\b0 I think the situation is going to get worse, maybe not better. We need a change in the band council. We need someone who will listen to the people. No one is listening to us. The drinking was mentioned to the chief one time, he said it is not a political issue. It has nothing to do with the band council. It is the responsibility of social services. There is a general assembly when people can say that their complaints are. Most of time they do not do anything.\
\
Younger people are employed in the band council. They used to have an elder in the band council, now they do not have any.\
\
I hope something is done by the chief and council, this can not go on. I hope we get our Northern back.\
I find that since the Northern has been closed, there has been a lot of drunks. I think it is because what happened, that is their way of showing they do not like what happened. But instead of doing something about they turn to the bottle. They go to Radisson to get alcohol. Now it is easier to get drugs too.\
\
People are getting paid to do nothing.}